                                                              Last revision: February 13, 2012
                         Francisco Suárez, S. J.
                                                         1
                         DEANIMADISP.12,Q.2
                         ©SydneyPenner2011
                                            Whether the will is free in its acts.
                              1. After what was said about its object and acts, we should next
                         talk about the power, about which (as I noted in previous disputations)
                         it is already clear that it is a spiritual power apart from a bodily organ.
                         One can, nevertheless, ask whether it is really distinct from the intel-
                         lect or not. For many think that intellect and will are distinguished only
                                              2       3
                         formally, as Durandus, Scotus, andotherssayinI,dist.3,q.7. AndAu-
                         gustineinDeTrinitateX4 seemstoplacenostrongerdistinctionbetween
                         intellect and will than between memory and intellect.
                              Nevertheless, we think along with St. Thomas that they are really
                                                                                            5
                         distinguished. Aristotle also seems to say this in De anima III, text. 29.
                         And, of course, having supposed that they are really distinguished from
                         the essence [of the soul], it is much more probable that they are also [re-
                         ally] distinguished from each other. Nothing disagreeable results from
                         positing this distinction, but all those things pertaining to these powers
                         are understood much more easily.
                              2. Assuming this, therefore, only the question about the freedom
                         of the will remains of those that can be discussed about the power it-
                         self. And this question most strongly depends on theology, for a per-
                         fect division of it requires knowing how God can ﬁrmly cognize free
                            1TheDeanimahasacomplicatedtextualhistorythatIwillnotgointohere. Sufﬁce
                         to say that the main text translated here is that found in Salvador Castellote’s edition,
                         volume3(Madrid: FundaciónXavierZubiri,1991),pp.380–406. Mostofthefootnotes
                         are based on the footnotes in Castellote’s edition.
                           Earlier editions as edited posthumouslybyAlvarezomitmostofthistextongrounds
                         that Suárez has better treatments of the subject in other works. The corresponding
                         section as found, for example, in the Vivès edition is lib. V, cap. 8 (Opera Omnia, vol. 3,
                         pp. 773–74). I have appended at the end of this document a translation of the note with
                         whichAlvarezreplaces the original text in lib. v, cap. 8.
                            2Sent. I, dist. 2, q. 4.
                            3Sent. II, dist. 16, q. 1, n. 18.
                            4Cap. 11, n. 18.
                            5Cf. De anima 414a31, 432b3, and 433a9. Cf. Aquinas, ST Ia.79.1 ad 2.
                        Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                       2
                        operations without taking away freedom. Also, how the providence
                        and concursus of God and, especially, how his prevenient grace stands
                                    6
                        with freewill. Also, how predestination and conﬁrmation in grace does
                        not destroy freedom. Nevertheless, refraining from all these matters,
                        weshould brieﬂy discuss the question according to its proper principles
                        alone. Nor can I entirely omit it, since it is proper to the matter that
                                                7
                        St. Thomas discusses here.
                             3. It seems, therefore, that the negative answer to the question is
                        true.
                             First, because a power which deliberates towards one [object] is not
                        free. But the will is terminated in one [object], namely, the good. There-
                        fore.
                             Second, that the same power act both freely and necessarily is con-
                        tradictory. But out will acts necessarily in many things, for it necessarily
                        loves happiness and the clear vision of God. Therefore.
                             Third, a free power for acting is one which, once all the requisites
                        for acting are in place, can either act or not act. But the will is not like
                        this. Therefore. The minor premise is proven: for the will requires the
                        concursus of the divine will so that it can issue an act. But once the will
                        of Godis posited, our will cannot not act. Therefore.
                             Fourth, for either God knows that I will do this thing or he does
                        not know it. If the former, then I will infallibly do it. If the latter, then
                        I will infallibly not do it. Therefore, in neither case is there the freedom
                        to act or not to act.
                             Fifth, if our power is free, then either [it is free] while it acts or
                        before it actually acts. But not the latter, for in that case it has not yet
                        acted [at all] and therefore has not acted freely. But neither when it is
                        acting, since then it acts necessarily. For it is necessary that a thing be
                        whenitis. Andwhenitisacting,it is necessary that it be acting.
                             Sixth, becauseoursoulistheformofthebody. Therefore,itfollows
                        theconditionofthebodyinitsoperations. Therefore,justasotherforms
                        depend on the heavens in their operations and follow inﬂuence from it,
                        so also our soul and will. But the heavens’ inﬂuence operates naturally.
                        Therefore, our will, which follows it, also operates naturally.
                             Seventh, will and sensitive appetite are powers rooted in the same
                           6I take ‘liberum arbitrii’ as a technical term naming the item under dispute. The
                        equivalent term in contemporary philosophy might be ‘freedom of the will’, though it
                        has the disadvantage of already suggesting a theory as to which faculty would provide
                        us with this freedom. I will translate ‘liberum arbitrii’ with ‘freewill’ as a single word
                        and reserve ‘freedom of the will’ for ‘libertas voluntatis’ where it is clear that it is the
                        will’s freedom that is being considered.
                           7ST I.82.1–2 and I.83.
                          Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                            3
                          soul. Therefore, whatever one of these powers desires, the other also
                          desires. For it is the same soul desiring in either case. Moreover, the
                          same soul cannot at the same time desire contraries. But the sensitive
                          appetite operates naturally. Therefore, etc.
                               Eighth, if our will were free by its nature, it could not be necessi-
                          tated by God. The consequent is false; therefore. The consequence is
                          obvious, both because God cannot change the nature of thigns and be-
                          causeGodcannotbringitaboutthatapoweractfreelythatisnotfreeby
                          its nature. Therefore, neither can God bring it about that a free power
                          act necessarily. The catholic faith is to the contrary.
                               4. All the ancient pagans who asserted that our soul is material
                          and mortal especially erred in this question. And it is descended from
                          the error of the Stoics who said that all our operations are subject to
                          the necessity of fate, as is seen in Cicero, De fato;8 Plutarch, De placitis
                          philosophorum I, cap. 28 and 29; and Augustine, De civitate Dei V, cap. 8
                          and 9, and De haeresibus cap. 70. Almost the same error was followed
                          bythePriscillians, who said that we necessarily operate according to the
                                                                                       9
                          inﬂuence of the stars, as is gathered from St. Leo, Letter 93; Jerome,
                                              10                                 11
                          Letter to Ctesiphon;   and the Council of Braga, cap. 9.  The error of
                          the Manichaeans was similar to this. Just as they posited two gods, one
                          the principle of goods, the other of bads, so also they posited two souls
                          in us, one which necessitates to good, the other to bad.
                               These three errors completely remove freedom from the will as a
                          result of its intrinsic nature.
                               Otherheretics remove freedom as a result of other extrinsic causes.
                               Some say that the foreknowledge and providence of God remove
                          our freedom. Abelard held this view, whom Wycliffe—condemned in
                          the Council of Constance, sess. 812—followed. And the same view is
                          followed in part by Luther.
                               Others remove freewill, especially in the baptized, on account of
                                                                                          13
                          God’s grace necessitating them. Jovinian, against whom Jerome     and
                                    14
                          Augustine oftendisputed, held this error.
                               Others say that freewill was removed on account of original sin,
                          after which human beings are necessitated to sinning. Luther erred in
                             8VI–XVII.
                             9Letter 15 (numbered 93 prior to Quesnell’s edition), cap. 11.14.
                            10Letter 133, v-x.
                            11Denzinger 239.
                            12Denzinger 607.
                            13Cf. Adversus Iovinianum.
                            14De haeres.
                            Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                                 4
                                                                15
                            this way, saying in art. 36 to Leo X  that ‘freewill after sin is a matter of
                            title only’ and is imagined in things.
                                 Many saints have already been cited against these heretics. Also:
                            Augustine, De libero arbitrio; St. Bernard;16 Anselm;17 Origen;18 and
                                       19
                            Tertullian,   under the same title. And especially against Luther: John
                                                           20
                            Fisher (c. 1469–1535), cap. 36.   Merit is said to be the gift of grace and
                                                      21
                            freedom: Albert Pighius;     John Eck, Enchiridion locorum communium
                            adversusLutherum,cap.30;Soto,Denaturaetgratia,cap.15;andCastro,
                            Dehaeresibus, s.v. ‘liberum arbitrium’.22
                                 5. It should be known, nevertheless, that freedom is in one way
                            opposed to slavery, according to the passages John 8[:36] ‘If, therefore,
                            the son shall make you free ...’ and Romans 6[:20] ‘When you were
                            slaves to sin, you were free [of justice]’. In another way it is opposed
                            to necessity. 1 Corinthians 7[:37]: ‘For he who stands steadfast, not
                            having necessity, but having the power of his own will’. And it is also
                            opposed to compulsion, for he who is compelled is necessitated. And
                            we are asking about this freedom here, for freewill, as Soto, above, in
                            cap. 15, lib. 5, noted, with the word ‘libet’ having been said, he is said
                            to be free, as it were, who by his own will (sponte) does whatever pleases
                            him. Moreover, this freedom consists in this, namely, that a power can
                            issue an act or not issue the act, once all the requisites for acting have
                            been posited. For example, if an eye was able both to see and not to see
                            with a visible object in place and the eyelid open, it would be free. The
                            phrase ‘once all the requisites ...’ is included because failing to do an
                            action because of a lack of the object or some other impediment where
                            something is lacking is also not freedom.
                                 6. Second, it should be noted that this question can have two senses.
                            The ﬁrst: whether our will is absolutely free. The second: whether,
                            given this, our will exercises this freedom in all its acts or only in some
                            andwhichonesthoseare.
                                 7. With respect to the ﬁrst, the ﬁrst conclusion is that the will has
                            freedomanddominionofitsoperationsoractions.
                                 This conclusion is one from the foundations of our faith. For He-
                            brews 11[:6] says that ‘he who comes to God must believe that he is
                              15De servo arbitrio. Cf. Leo X’s bull Exsurge Domine, error 36.
                              16De gratia et libero arbitrio and Sermo 81 in Cantica.
                              17Dialogus de libero arbitrio.
                              18Cf. De principiis.
                              19Cf. De anima XX.5 and Adversus Marcionem II.6.6.
                              20Confutatio cap. 36.
                              21Cf. De libero hominis arbitrio et divina gratia, libri decem, lib. 1, cap. 2.
                              22Adversus haereses lib. 9, s.v. ‘libertas’.
                         Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                          5
                         andthatisarewarderofthosewhocometohim’. Butthereisnoreward
                         wherethereisnotfreedom. Fornecessaryactions,moreover—Augustine
                         says it well—we neither give credit nor take away credit.23 Genesis 4[:7]
                         says ‘If you do well, will you not receive? But if you do ill, will sin not
                         be at the door at once?’ And the same is gathered from Deuteronomy
                         30[:11–20]. And Sirach 15[:14] says that ‘[God] left him in the hand of
                         his own counsel’. And Sirach 31[:10]: ‘He that could have transgressed
                         and did not transgress; and could do bad things and did not.’ And 1
                         Corinthians 7[:37]: ‘having power of his own will ...’
                              In addition, Holy Scripture is full of precepts, exhortations, warn-
                         ings, and promises, none of which can be understood without freedom,
                         as St. Augustine well describes in Letter 46.24 Also, God punishes the
                         wicked—Matthew 25[:41–46]—but if they were not free, they would be
                         punishedwithoutcause. Thisisamostcertainmatterofthefaith,forthe
                         testimony brought up speaks generally. And this truth was established
                         against the Lutherans in the Council of Trent, sess. 6, cap. 5 and 6.
                              8. This conclusion is also evident to natural reason, which Epictetus
                                                                           25
                         followed, who—asAgostinoSteucoreportsincap.16 —says: ‘Notonly
                         didGodgivethesefacultiestous,bywhichweendurealladversitieswith
                         dignity ...But because it was of a good king and true father, he give this
                         to us free and unencumbered, not coerced, and he planted and placed
                         each one in us and did not wish any remaining force that could be an
                         impediment.’
                              Furthermore, experience supports the conclusion: for we ourselves
                         see that we act and we cease from that activity when we wish. And in
                         this human beings differ from brute animals and the judicious from the
                         insane.
                              Furthermore, according to the sense of every human being, human
                         operations are deserving of praise and blame, reward and punishment.
                         Andthis is, as it were, a ﬁrst principle of rational nature. Therefore, we
                         are free.
                              Also, human beings are by their nature ﬁt for counsel, admonition,
                         and precepts. [If we were not free], counsel would be vain and laws su-
                         perﬂuous,whichisagainsttheinclinationofnature. Moreover,ifhuman
                         beings are not free, they are not useful, for human beings would always
                         act necessarily, as if counsel were given to brute animals or law imposed
                         on them. Hence, to remove freewill is to destroy the order of the state,
                         of religion, and of piety.
                           23Cf. De libero arbitrio III I 1.4 and III I 3.13.
                           24Nownumbered214.
                           25De perenni philosophia lib. 9.
                          Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                             6
                               Furthermore, it is obvious according to the light of nature that hu-
                          man beings often sin and do evil. Therefore, they act necessarily and
                          are necessitated by nature itself and consequently by the author of that
                          nature to doing evil. The consequent is absurd.
                               Furthermore,humanbeingsbytheirnaturearelordoftheiractions.
                          This lordship consists in being able by their freedom to exercise or not
                          to exercise those actions. Therefore, they are free. The antecedent is
                          proven, for human beings are lords of other things, for every natural
                          reason dictates that human beings are capable of lordship and that it is
                          evil to take away from someone what is his. But that lordship consists
                          in being free to use his things. And lordship over his actions consists in
                          human beings being made in the image of God, as was noted by John
                          Damascene in Fideo lib. II, cap. 12, and Augustine in Psalm 57. And for
                          this reason after God said ‘let us make humankind in our image and in
                                                                    26
                          our likeness’, he added ‘and may he rule’.    All these are a posteriori
                          demonstrations.
                               9. But in order to demonstrate it a priori, it is necessary to explain
                                                                                               27
                          in what freedom formally and at root consists. In what was said above:
                               First, this freedom is ﬁtting for human beings in accordance with
                          their being rational, which in no way is ﬁtting for any other animal.
                          This is evidence, therefore, that it is ﬁtting for human beings by reason
                          of that power in which they supersede other animals.
                               The same thing is evident by experience, for human beings do not
                          experience freedom in themselves except insofar as they use reason.
                               Also, since this part is spiritual, freedom belongs to the spiritual
                          part. Hence, St. Thomas in ST IaIIae.1.1 and the Teacher in Sent. II,
                          dist. 24, cap. 5, say that freewill in its proper signiﬁcation refers to a
                          certain act, yet the term is carried over to signifying the principle of the
                          act. Hence, it now signiﬁes a power, as St. Thomas noted in ST Ia.83.2.
                          Andtherefore it is called a faculty, namely, natural. For natural faculties
                          are powers. Still, ‘of the will and of reason’ is added, because freedom
                          consists partly in reason and partly in will; in reason as in a root and in
                          will as in a formally free subject.
                               Each claim is proven. For freedom consists formally in the will for
                          it consists formally in indifference of election. A human being is free for
                          thereasonthathecanelecteitherthisorthat. Italsoconsistsinafreeuse
                          of his own operations. But to elect and to use other powers belongs to
                          the will, as is obvious. Therefore, freedom formally belongs to the will.
                          Andeveryoperation is thought free only insofar as it is subjected to the
                            26Genesis 1:26.
                            27Cf. disp. 2, q. 3, n. 18.
                        Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                       7
                        will.
                             Butthatthisfreedomarisesfromreasonisobviousintheﬁrstplace,
                        because desire arises from cognition, as was shown above.28 Therefore,
                        the mode of desire and of that will also arise from the mode and proper-
                        ties of the cognized.
                             10. But it is necessary to explain in particular how freedom in the
                        will arises from reason.
                             TheThomistscommonlyexplainthatthefreedomofthewillarises
                        fromtheindifferenceoftheintellect. Forthatreason—theysay—thewill
                        canlovesomethingornotloveit,becausetheintellectisnotnecessitated
                        to judging that thing to be better. Rather, the intellect can ﬁnd some
                        aspect of good and some aspect of bad in the object. St. Thomas seems
                        to teach this view in ST Ia.83.1, where he says that brute animals do not
                        have freedom because they do not act by the judgement of reason. But
                        humanbeingshavefreewill,becausetheyactbythejudgementofreason
                        because it has the power for opposites.
                             It is also proven by reason, for freedom of the will consists in being
                        able to love and not to love an object once proposed as good. But it
                        cannot do this as it pleases. Rather, it can only love it insofar as it ﬁnds
                        some aspect of good and it can only not love it insofar as it ﬁnds some
                        aspect of bad. Therefore, freedom consists in this, namely, that both
                        aspects of good and of bad can be found in the same object.
                             It is conﬁrmed: for if the intellect were to cognize some good in the
                        love for which it could ﬁnd no aspect of bad, the will would not be able
                        not to love it. Therefore.
                             FrancisSylvesterofFerraraholdsthisviewinSCGIII,thelastchap-
                        ter, as does Soncinas in Metaphysics IX, q. 14. And from this they infer
                        that the will ought always to elect that which the intellect judges to be
                        better and more agreeable, since it cannot reject something except be-
                        cause it found in it some aspect of bad or of lesser good.
                             Theirargumentseemstobethatthefreedomofthewilloughttobe
                        within the latitude of its object, which is the good.
                             But that way has a difﬁculty, for if this is true, the will is not more
                        free than the intellect. For just as the intellect necessarily assents to the
                        true, so also the will loves the good to which no bad is communicated.
                        And just as the will can fail to love the good because it ﬁnds an aspect
                        of bad, so also the intellect can fail to assent if the true does not appear
                        certain but is mixed with falsity in a certain way.
                             Furthermore, it follows that, absolutely speaking, the will is not
                        free, for it always follows the judgement of the intellect and must elect
                          28Disp. 10, q. 1, nn. 2–3.
                           Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                             8
                           whattheintellect judges to be better. But the intellect is not free. There-
                           fore, neither is the will free.
                                Furthermore, this opinion is soaked in the opinion of Durandus,
                           which almost all theologians disprove, namely, that freedom is formally
                           in the intellect. For insofar as freedom in the will arises from the indif-
                           ference and freedom of the intellect’s judgement, freedom will be prior
                           andmoreperfectintheintellect.
                                Anotherwayofspeakingisthatthefreedomofthewillarisesfrom
                           the intellect, yet not from its indifference but from its perfection and
                           universality. For the intellect surpasses the other sensitive powers in this,
                           namely, that it not just cognizes confusedly that this thing is agreeable,
                           but that it distinctly perceives the aspect of agreeability, by separating
                           it from all the other aspects with which it is conjoined and considering
                           it insofar as it is desirable. And from this perfection of cognition arises
                           the perfection in the desire of the will. For just as the intellect perceives
                           in each thing how much goodness or badness it has, so the will can love
                           it according to the goodness examined in it. And for this reason those
                           things which appear good are not loved necessarily but freely. And all
                           the particular things which occur in this life are of this sort. For partic-
                           ular things are never apprehended as necessary [goods], either because
                           happiness is not placed in that in which it should be placed, because it is
                           not actually considered, or, at least, because numerically these acts and
                                                                29
                           this object are not deemed necessary.   From here, therefore, arises the
                           freedomofthewill. Andthereforewhateverparticulargoodisproposed
                           to the will, it can love the good for the sake of the goodness that it has
                           andit can fail to love it because it is not deemed necessary for happiness,
                           at least here and now.
                                But it should be responded that it is one thing [not] to love and
                           another to pursue hatred.30 Not to love implies freedom with respect to
                           exercise. And it is not necessary to ﬁnd an aspect of bad in the object
                           for this; rather, it is sufﬁcient not to ﬁnd a necessary aspect of good.31
                           But for hatred it is necessary to ﬁnd some aspect of bad. And the ﬁrst
                           view—whichshouldbeexplainedratherthanwhollyrepudiated—points
                           in this direction.
                                11. Fromallofthis,anaprioriargumentfortheconclusion: forthe
                             29This sentence makes as little sense to me in the Latin as in this English version.
                             30Latintextdoesnothavethenegation,butsenserequiresit(andCastellote’sSpanish
                           translation includes it without comment).
                             31This is an awkward way to say that it is sufﬁcient to fail to ﬁnd an aspect of good
                           necessary for happiness; the point is not about whether the goodness is a necessary
                           property of the object.
            Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2    9
            will follows the rational and discursive power. Therefore it is free. The
            conclusionholdsbecausefreewillfollowsontheintellectandreason,for,
            as is proven from what was said, the intellect apprehends the aspects of
            good and bad and of each thing it judges by what aspect and way it is
            desirable and good. Therefore, appetite, which follows such cognition,
            will be able to love each cognized good by that aspect and way by which
            it is desirable and therefore [it will be able to love] freely.
              It is conﬁrmed: for desire follows cognition. Therefore, an appeti-
            tive power in the highest grade follows the cognoscitive power existing
            in the highest grade, and, therefore, freely. But the intellect is such a
            poweramongthecognoscitivepowers;therefore,thewillamongappeti-
            tive powers.
              12. Whetherthewillandfreewillarereallydistinguished. Fromwhich
            it is also proven that the will and freewill are the same in thing and na-
            ture. They are distinguished just like intellect and reason. For just as
            intellect is called intellect ﬁrst and absolutely, insofar as it understands
            or insofar as it understands (intuetur) a thing, strictly speaking, but is
            called reason insofar as it reasons discursively, so also the will is called
            such either insofar as it wills or insofar as it tends in a simple way to the
            end, but is called freewill insofar as it turns to means by free election.
              13. In which acts or concerning which objects the will is free. But
            concerning this conclusion we still need to explain in which acts and
            concerning which objects the will is free. But this cannot be explained
            without discussing multiple theological questions at the same time. And
            for that reason I say brieﬂy that willing with respect to exercise is one
            thing (it consists in being able to have an act and to cease from that act)
            and willing with respect to speciﬁcation is another (it consists in being
            able to have this act or its contrary, either love or hatred, or in being able
            to love either this thing or its opposite).
              I say, therefore, that the will is determined with respect to speci-
            ﬁcation to the good and happiness in general, but not with respect to
            exercise.
              The ﬁrst part is proven: for no aspect of bad appears in happiness
            or in the good in general so that the will could pursue hatred of it.
              Thesecondpartisproven: for a love of this good or of happiness is
            never offered in this life as strictly speaking necessary and therefore the
            will is not necessitated to exercising it. On the other hand, the will is
            not necessitated to any particular good in this life, neither with respect
            to exercise (because one does not plainly and clearly see a complete and
            necessary aspect of good in it) nor with respect to speciﬁcation (because
            there is no good in this life which is not mixed up with bads and difﬁ-
                        Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                      10
                        culties). Hence, the will differs in this respect from the intellect, for the
                        intellect is not free in itself with respect to exercise, but depends on the
                        motion of the will, as was shown above.32 But with respect to speciﬁca-
                        tion, if the object appears evidently true, the intellect is necessitated to
                        assenting. But the will is not necessitated to loving something even if it
                        appears evidently good. This is because the aspect of truth is only one
                        in kind and so, if a thing has truth, all falsity is excluded. On the other
                        hand, the aspect of goodness is not only one and so one goodness can
                        be mixed up with other aspect of bad. After this life, however, if a hu-
                        manbeing attains the vision of God, it will be necessitated to a love for
                        Godbothwithrespect to exercise and with respect to speciﬁcation. For
                        there no aspect of bad can be found, but always the most supreme and
                        necessary aspect of good. But in all other acts the will is free, as much in
                        election as in intention for the end, although in different ways. For con-
                        cerning means it acts not only freely but with deliberation and counsel.
                        But concerning the end it acts without deliberation. But about all these
                        things one should talk about ST IaIIae, some of q. 1 and some of qq. 9,
                        10, and 13.
                             14. Response to the ﬁrst and second arguments. From here the so-
                        lution to the ﬁrst and second arguments is proven. I respond that the
                        same power which operates freely concerning some objects can operate
                        naturally and necessarily concerning other objects. This is because it is a
                        higher power and operates according to the exigency of the objects, just
                        as the will of God necessarily loves his essence because that object is wor-
                        thy of being loved that way but loves creatures freely because they are
                        also worthy of being loved in this way. So also our will proportionately.
                             15. Response to the third. How God concurs with our will. The third
                        argument begs for a long treatise about the way in which God concurs
                        withourwillinexercisingacts,naturalaswellassupernatural,whilepre-
                        serving our will’s freedom. Many theologians speak about this matter,
                        whichcanbeseeninST Ia.19, 22, and 23 and IaIIae.109. Nevertheless, I
                        brieﬂy say, along with St. Thomas in the mentioned places as well as IaI-
                        Iae.10.3, that since the will is free by its nature, God, since he is inﬁnite
                        in wisdomandpower,adjustshimselftothecausesofthingsandconcurs
                        with each one in that way which its nature requires. And thus he works
                        withthewillwithoutnecessitating it but leaving it to determine itself to
                        whatitwishedandofferingassistance and counsel to it.
                             Therefore, I respond to the argument in form, that once everything
                        required has been posited in the ﬁrst act, the will can issue and not issue
                        a second act. For God, for his part, is prepared to concur with the will
                          32Disp. 12, q. 1, n. 7.
                            Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                                11
                            for the act which it wishes to effect. It is in my power whether God
                            concurs with me or does not concur. And therefore, there is freedom
                            in election. Hence, when it is said that once the divine will is posited,
                            the will cannot not act, it still carries through, nevertheless, that the will
                            acts freely. For that proposition has a compound sense and only posits a
                            conditional necessity.
                                 16. Response to the fourth. I respond to the fourth argument that the
                            will, when it acts, acts freely strictly speaking. And when it does not act,
                            it freely does not act. For in that same instant in which it could act as
                            far as it is concerned it could also not act. In order to understand this
                            the will should be considered in that instant in which it elicits an act as
                            a nature prior to the act itself. And this power as such freely determines
                            itself to eliciting this act. And after it is already understood under the
                            act, it necessarily is under that act which then is, because the composite
                            has been made. And that is only the necessity of the consequence rather
                            than the necessity of the consequent, since with that the freedom stands
                                              33
                            strictly speaking.   This argument is discussed more extensively in ST
                            Ia.14.13 and 19.7. And in this way freedom also remains.
                                 17. Response to the ﬁfth. [I respond to] the ﬁfth argument: for God
                            doesnotknowmyfreeactsexceptinsofarastheyareinsomewaypresent
                            to his eternity. And in that way he knows them to be future, as they are,
                            andhisknowledgedoesnotimplynecessityexceptconditionally.
                                 18. Response to the sixth. The sixth argument introduces another
                            difﬁculty: in what way the heavens have dominion over the operations
                            of our will. Concerning this matter, [see] ST IaIIae.9.5. But this is not
                            the place for discussing it in its entirety. Nevertheless, I say brieﬂy that
                            the heavens have an inﬂuence over the bodies of human being and over
                            all corporeal powers, which intrinsically in their dispositions depend on
                            thedispositionsofthebodies. But,ontheotherhand,theheavensdonot
                            directly have an inﬂuence or dominion over the acts of the intellect and
                            will. For these powers are spiritual and of a higher order, for although
                            oursoulistheformofthebodyit,nevertheless,isnotwhollyimmersed
                            inthebodybutisraisedfromthebodyinsomeofitsacts. Indirectlyand,
                            as it were, by consequence, insofar as reason follows sense and will fol-
                            lows appetite, the heavens, inﬂuencing these material powers, indirectly
                            and, as it were, by consequence, draw the will, not directly but by inclin-
                            ing it. Nevertheless, the will can through its freedom resist the inﬂuence
                              33Take a sentence of the form ‘if p, then p’. The sentence is necessarily true, but the
                            necessity attaches to the entire conditional (i.e., consequence), rather than to the conse-
                            quent. In other words, it is ‘necessarily(if p, then p)’ rather than ‘if p, then necessarily
                            p’.
                           Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2                                              12
                           of the heavens and have dominion over it. As it is said: ‘A wise person
                                                              34
                           will have dominion over the stars’.
                                19. In response to the seventh argument, so that we may oppose
                           the impiety of Luther’s assertion that the concupiscence of the sensitive
                           appetite is always a mortal sin and the will is always necessitated by the
                           disordering of the appetite that remains after sin. But the theologians
                           provokethis and therefore it should be said brieﬂy that appetite and will
                           are two distinct powers following different cognitions. And for this rea-
                           son they are inclined to different things. And one draws the other after
                           itself not by necessitating the other power but by inclining it in some
                           way. Nor is it repugnant that the same soul desire contraries through
                           different powers, especially if it constrains the inclination of one power
                           through the other power. Concerning this matter, see ST IaIIae.9.2.
                                20. The eighth argument raises another difﬁculty, namely, whether
                           God necessitates or compels the will. Concerning this matter, [see]
                                                                 35
                           St. Thomas, ST Ia.89.1 and IaIIae.6.4.   I answer brieﬂy—for it is a theo-
                           logical matter—that although the will of itself is free, it can, nevertheless,
                           be necessitated by God, for ‘the heart of the king is in the hand of God
                                                                     36
                           and he can turn it wherever he wishes’.      For God is omnipotent and
                           has dominion over the will. Nor is what is brought up in the argument
                           similar. For a thing which operates necessarily is material and of a lower
                           order and for that reason it is incapable of freedom of itself by its own
                           nature. For that reason, freedom cannot be conferred on it by God, for
                           freedom has to be from something intrinsic. For freedom expresses a
                           certain intrinsic dominion over one’s own acts and for that reason it in
                           unintelligible that freedom be attributed to something by an extrinsic
                           thing. But, on the other hand, necessity is from something extrinsic and
                           therefore God can impose necessity on a thing that is free according to
                           its own nature. Nevertheless, God cannot impose violence on the will.
                           Forviolenceexpresswhatiscontrarytothewillandinclination. Butthe
                           will cannot will something contrary to its own willing, for by the fact
                           that it wills, it already has a willing and inclination to that. And for that
                           reason compulsion in the will implies a contradiction. But there is more
                           to be said about these matters in their places.
                              34This quotation appears to have been popular in seventeenth-century Spain and can
                           be traced back to Ptolemy. See Herbert W. Greene, ‘ “Sapiens Dominabitur Astris”
                           ’, Notes and Queries s12-IX, no. 193 (1921): 509, and Edward Bensly, ‘ “Sapiens Dom-
                           inabitur Astris” ’, Notes and Queries s12-X, no. 195 (1922): 12–13.
                              35Cf. IaIIae.10.4.
                              36Proverbs 21:1.
              Suárez, DA disp. 12, q. 2            13
                        DEANIMALIB.V,CAP.8
                         (AS FOUND IN VIVÈS EDITION)
                  WHETHERTHEWILLISAFREEPOWERINALLITSACTS.
                 Weomitted this whole chapter that was in the autograph, because
              [the subject] is discussed more extensively in the De gratia, tom. I, pro-
              leg. 1, and in Disputatio metaphysica XIX, from sect. 2 onwards. Also
              because not just a few of the arguments can be seen as the same as in the
              fourthOpusculum, De libertate divinae voluntatis.
                 But one might ask for more about whether the rational appetite or
              will is a species of the lowest level or whether instead it is distinguished
              into different species in human beings and in angels. Recent theologians
              dispute about this question in ST Ia.59.1, where Cumelius [discusses it].
              Franciscus de Herrera also discusses it in Sent. II, dist. 13, q. 1, as well as
              the present author himself in De angelis III, cap. 1. Secondly, one might
              askwhetherthewillorrationalappetiteisdistinguishedinhumanbeings
              into concupiscible and irascible just as the sensitive appetite is usually
              distinguished by many. Aboutthismatter,oneshouldseethepresentau-
              thor in De angelis III, cap. 1, after Scotus and Gabriel in Sent. III, dist. 26
              and34,andHenryofGhent,Quodlibet8,q.15.
