And, of course, having supposed that they are really distinguished from the essence [of the soul], it is much more probable that they are also [really] distinguished from each other.

Sixth, because our soul is the form of the body.

Therefore, just as other forms depend on the heavens in their operations and follow inﬂuence from it, so also our soul and will.

Seventh, will and sensitive appetite are powers rooted in the same soul.

For it is the same soul desiring in either case.

Moreover, the same soul cannot at the same time desire contraries.

All the ancient pagans who asserted that our soul is material and mortal especially erred in this question.

Just as they posited two gods, one the principle of goods, the other of bads, so also they posited two souls in us, one which necessitates to good, the other to bad.

For these powers are spiritual and of a higher order, for although our soul is the form of the body it, nevertheless, is not wholly immersed in the body but is raised from the body in some of its acts.

Nor is it repugnant that the same soul desire contraries through different powers, especially if it constrains the inclination of one power through the other power.



In addition to this I considered that I was nourished, that I walked, that I felt, and that I thought, and I referred all these actions to the soul:  but I did not stop to consider what the soul was, or if I did stop, I imagined that it was something extremely rare and subtle like a wind, a flame, or an ether, which was spread throughout my grosser parts.

Let us pass to the attributes of soul and see if there is any one which is in me?

I do not now admit anything which is not necessarily true:  to speak accurately I am not more than a thing which thinks, that is to say a mind or a soul, or an understanding, or a reason, which are terms whose significance was formerly unknown to me.

And although possibly (or rather certainly, as I shall say in a moment) I possess a body with which I am very intimately conjoined, yet because, on the one side, I have a clear and distinct idea of myself inasmuch as I am only a thinking and unextended thing, and as, on the other, I possess a distinct idea of body, inasmuch as it is only an extended and unthinking thing, it is certain that this I [that is to say, my soul by which I am what I am], is entirely and absolutely distinct from my body, and can exist without it.

And also from the fact that amongst these different sense-perceptions some are very agreeable to me and others disagreeable, it is quite certain that my body (or rather myself in my entirety, inasmuch as I am formed of body and soul) may receive different impressions agreeable and disagreeable from the other bodies which surround it.

But certainly although in regard to the dropsical body it is only so to speak to apply an extrinsic term when we say that its nature is corrupted, inasmuch as apart from the need to drink, the throat is parched; yet in regard to the composite whole, that is to say, to the mind or soul united to this body, it is not a purely verbal predicate, but a real error of nature, for it to have thirst when drinking would be hurtful to it.

But it is quite otherwise with corporeal or extended objects, for there is not one of these imaginable by me which my mind cannot easily divide into parts, and which consequently I do not recognise as being divisible; this would be sufficient to teach me that the mind or soul of man is entirely different from the body, if I had not already learned it from other sources.

