Whether the will is free in its acts.

1. After what was said about its object and acts, we should next
talk about the power, about which (as I noted in previous disputations)
it is already clear that it is a spiritual power apart from a bodily organ.
One can, nevertheless, ask whether it is really distinct from the intel-
lect or not. For many think that intellect and will are distinguished only
formally, as Durandus, Scotus, and others say in I, dist. 3, q. 7.
And Augustine in De Trinitate X seems to place no stronger distinction between
intellect and will than between memory and intellect.
Nevertheless, we think along with St. Thomas that they are really
distinguished. Aristotle also seems to say this in De anima III, text. 29.
And, of course, having supposed that they are really distinguished from
the essence [of the soul], it is much more probable that they are also [re-
ally] distinguished from each other. Nothing disagreeable results from
positing this distinction, but all those things pertaining to these powers
are understood much more easily.

2. Assuming this, therefore, only the question about the freedom
of the will remains of those that can be discussed about the power itself.
And this question most strongly depends on theology, for a perfect
division of it requires knowing how God can ﬁrmly cognize free
operations without taking away freedom. Also, how the providence
and concursus of God and, especially, how his prevenient grace stands
with free will. Also, how predestination and conﬁrmation in grace does
not destroy freedom. Nevertheless, refraining from all these matters,
weshould brieﬂy discuss the question according to its proper principles
alone. Nor can I entirely omit it, since it is proper to the matter that
St. Thomas discusses here.

3. It seems, therefore, that the negative answer to the question is
true. First, because a power which deliberates towards one [object] is not
free. But the will is terminated in one [object], namely, the good. There-
fore.
Second, that the same power act both freely and necessarily is con-
tradictory. But out will acts necessarily in many things, for it necessarily
loves happiness and the clear vision of God. Therefore.
Third, a free power for acting is one which, once all the requisites
for acting are in place, can either act or not act. But the will is not like
this. Therefore. The minor premise is proven: for the will requires the
concursus of the divine will so that it can issue an act. But once the will
of Godis posited, our will cannot not act. Therefore.
Fourth, for either God knows that I will do this thing or he does
not know it. If the former, then I will infallibly do it. If the latter, then
I will infallibly not do it. Therefore, in neither case is there the freedom
to act or not to act.
Fifth, if our power is free, then either [it is free] while it acts or
before it actually acts. But not the latter, for in that case it has not yet
acted [at all] and therefore has not acted freely. But neither when it is
acting, since then it acts necessarily. For it is necessary that a thing be
whenitis. And when it is acting, it is necessary that it be acting.
Sixth, because our soul is the form of the body. Therefore, it follows
the condition of the body in its operations. Therefore, just as other forms
depend on the heavens in their operations and follow inﬂuence from it,
so also our soul and will. But the heavens’ inﬂuence operates naturally.
Therefore, our will, which follows it, also operates naturally.
Seventh, will and sensitive appetite are powers rooted in the same
soul. Therefore, whatever one of these powers desires, the other also
desires. For it is the same soul desiring in either case. Moreover, the
same soul cannot at the same time desire contraries. But the sensitive
appetite operates naturally. Therefore, etc.
Eighth, if our will were free by its nature, it could not be necessi-
tated by God. The consequent is false; therefore. The consequence is
obvious, both because God cannot change the nature of thigns and because
 God cannot bring it about that a power act freely that is not free by
its nature. Therefore, neither can God bring it about that a free power
act necessarily. The catholic faith is to the contrary.

4. All the ancient pagans who asserted that our soul is material
and mortal especially erred in this question. And it is descended from
the error of the Stoics who said that all our operations are subject to
the necessity of fate, as is seen in Cicero, De fato;8 Plutarch, De placitis
philosophorum I, cap. 28 and 29; and Augustine, De civitate Dei V, cap. 8
and 9, and De haeresibus cap. 70. Almost the same error was followed
bythePriscillians, who said that we necessarily operate according to the
inﬂuence of the stars, as is gathered from St. Leo, Letter 93; Jerome,
Letter to Ctesiphon; and the Council of Braga, cap. 9.  The error of
the Manichaeans was similar to this. Just as they posited two gods, one
the principle of goods, the other of bads, so also they posited two souls
in us, one which necessitates to good, the other to bad.
These three errors completely remove freedom from the will as a
result of its intrinsic nature.
Otherheretics remove freedom as a result of other extrinsic causes.
Some say that the foreknowledge and providence of God remove
our freedom. Abelard held this view, whom Wycliffe—condemned in
the Council of Constance, sess. 812—followed. And the same view is
followed in part by Luther.
Others remove freewill, especially in the baptized, on account of
God’s grace necessitating them. Jovinian, against whom Jerome and
Augustine oftendisputed, held this error.
Others say that freewill was removed on account of original sin,
after which human beings are necessitated to sinning. Luther erred in
this way, saying in art. 36 to Leo X  that ‘freewill after sin is a matter of
title only’ and is imagined in things.
Many saints have already been cited against these heretics. Also:
Augustine, De libero arbitrio; St. Bernard; Anselm; Origen; and
Tertullian, under the same title. And especially against Luther: John
Fisher (c. 1469–1535), cap. 36. Merit is said to be the gift of grace and
freedom: Albert Pighius; John Eck, Enchiridion locorum communium
adversusLutherum, cap.30; Soto, Denaturaetgratia, cap.15; and Castro,
Dehaeresibus, s.v. ‘liberum arbitrium’.

5. It should be known, nevertheless, that freedom is in one way
opposed to slavery, according to the passages John 8[:36] ‘If, therefore,
the son shall make you free ...’ and Romans 6[:20] ‘When you were
slaves to sin, you were free [of justice]’. In another way it is opposed
to necessity. 1 Corinthians 7[:37]: ‘For he who stands steadfast, not
having necessity, but having the power of his own will’. And it is also
opposed to compulsion, for he who is compelled is necessitated. And
we are asking about this freedom here, for freewill, as Soto, above, in
cap. 15, lib. 5, noted, with the word ‘libet’ having been said, he is said
to be free, as it were, who by his own will (sponte) does whatever pleases
him. Moreover, this freedom consists in this, namely, that a power can
issue an act or not issue the act, once all the requisites for acting have
been posited. For example, if an eye was able both to see and not to see
with a visible object in place and the eyelid open, it would be free. The
phrase ‘once all the requisites ...’ is included because failing to do an
action because of a lack of the object or some other impediment where
something is lacking is also not freedom.

6. Second, it should be noted that this question can have two senses.
The ﬁrst: whether our will is absolutely free. The second: whether,
given this, our will exercises this freedom in all its acts or only in some
andwhichonesthoseare.

7. With respect to the ﬁrst, the ﬁrst conclusion is that the will has
freedomanddominionofitsoperationsoractions.
This conclusion is one from the foundations of our faith. For He-
brews 11[:6] says that ‘he who comes to God must believe that he is
and that is a rewarder of those who come to him’. But there is no reward
where there is not freedom. For necessary actions, moreover — Augustine
says it well — we neither give credit nor take away credit. Genesis 4[:7]
says ‘If you do well, will you not receive? But if you do ill, will sin not
be at the door at once?’ And the same is gathered from Deuteronomy
30[:11–20]. And Sirach 15[:14] says that ‘[God] left him in the hand of
his own counsel’. And Sirach 31[:10]: ‘He that could have transgressed
and did not transgress; and could do bad things and did not.’ And 1
Corinthians 7[:37]: ‘having power of his own will ...’
In addition, Holy Scripture is full of precepts, exhortations, warn-
ings, and promises, none of which can be understood without freedom,
as St. Augustine well describes in Letter 46. Also, God punishes the
wicked—Matthew 25[:41–46]—but if they were not free, they would be
punishedwithoutcause. This is amost certain matter of the faith, for the
testimony brought up speaks generally. And this truth was established
against the Lutherans in the Council of Trent, sess. 6, cap. 5 and 6.

8. This conclusion is also evident to natural reason, which Epictetus
followed, who — as Agostino Steuco reports in cap.16 — says: ‘Not only
did God give these faculties to us, by which we endure all adversities with
dignity ...But because it was of a good king and true father, he give this
to us free and unencumbered, not coerced, and he planted and placed
each one in us and did not wish any remaining force that could be an
impediment.’
Furthermore, experience supports the conclusion: for we ourselves
see that we act and we cease from that activity when we wish. And in
this human beings differ from brute animals and the judicious from the
insane.
Furthermore, according to the sense of every human being, human
operations are deserving of praise and blame, reward and punishment.
Andthis is, as it were, a ﬁrst principle of rational nature. Therefore, we
are free.
Also, human beings are by their nature ﬁt for counsel, admonition,
and precepts. [If we were not free], counsel would be vain and laws su-
perﬂuous,whichisagainsttheinclinationofnature. Moreover,ifhuman
beings are not free, they are not useful, for human beings would always
act necessarily, as if counsel were given to brute animals or law imposed
on them. Hence, to remove freewill is to destroy the order of the state,
of religion, and of piety.
Furthermore, it is obvious according to the light of nature that hu-
man beings often sin and do evil. Therefore, they act necessarily and
are necessitated by nature itself and consequently by the author of that
nature to doing evil. The consequent is absurd.
Furthermore,human beings by thei rnature are lord of their actions.
This lordship consists in being able by their freedom to exercise or not
to exercise those actions. Therefore, they are free. The antecedent is
proven, for human beings are lords of other things, for every natural
reason dictates that human beings are capable of lordship and that it is
evil to take away from someone what is his. But that lordship consists
in being free to use his things. And lordship over his actions consists in
human beings being made in the image of God, as was noted by John
Damascene in Fideo lib. II, cap. 12, and Augustine in Psalm 57. And for
this reason after God said ‘let us make humankind in our image and in
our likeness’, he added ‘and may he rule’.    All these are a posteriori
demonstrations.

9. But in order to demonstrate it a priori, it is necessary to explain
in what freedom formally and at root consists. In what was said above:
First, this freedom is ﬁtting for human beings in accordance with
their being rational, which in no way is ﬁtting for any other animal.
This is evidence, therefore, that it is ﬁtting for human beings by reason
of that power in which they supersede other animals.
The same thing is evident by experience, for human beings do not
experience freedom in themselves except insofar as they use reason.
Also, since this part is spiritual, freedom belongs to the spiritual
part. Hence, St. Thomas in ST IaIIae.1.1 and the Teacher in Sent. II,
dist. 24, cap. 5, say that freewill in its proper signiﬁcation refers to a
certain act, yet the term is carried over to signifying the principle of the
act. Hence, it now signiﬁes a power, as St. Thomas noted in ST Ia.83.2.
Andtherefore it is called a faculty, namely, natural. For natural faculties
are powers. Still, ‘of the will and of reason’ is added, because freedom
consists partly in reason and partly in will; in reason as in a root and in
will as in a formally free subject.
Each claim is proven. For freedom consists formally in the will for
it consists formally in indifference of election. A human being is free for
thereasonthathecanelecteitherthisorthat. Italsoconsistsinafreeuse
of his own operations. But to elect and to use other powers belongs to
the will, as is obvious. Therefore, freedom formally belongs to the will.
Andeveryoperation is thought free only insofar as it is subjected to the will.
But that this freedom arises from reason is obvious in the ﬁrst place,
because desire arises from cognition, as was shown above. Therefore,
the mode of desire and of that will also arise from the mode and proper-
ties of the cognized.

10. But it is necessary to explain in particular how freedom in the
will arises from reason.
The Thomists commonly explain that the freedom of the will arises
from the indifference of the intellect. For that reason — they say — the will
can love something or not love it, because the intellect is not necessitated
to judging that thing to be better. Rather, the intellect can ﬁnd some
aspect of good and some aspect of bad in the object. St. Thomas seems
to teach this view in ST Ia.83.1, where he says that brute animals do not
have freedom because they do not act by the judgement of reason. But
human beings have free will, because they act by the judgement of reason
because it has the power for opposites.
It is also proven by reason, for freedom of the will consists in being
able to love and not to love an object once proposed as good. But it
cannot do this as it pleases. Rather, it can only love it insofar as it ﬁnds
some aspect of good and it can only not love it insofar as it ﬁnds some
aspect of bad. Therefore, freedom consists in this, namely, that both
aspects of good and of bad can be found in the same object.
It is conﬁrmed: for if the intellect were to cognize some good in the
love for which it could ﬁnd no aspect of bad, the will would not be able
not to love it. Therefore.
Francis Sylvester of Ferrara holds this view in SCG III, the last chapter,
as does Soncinas in Metaphysics IX, q. 14. And from this they infer
that the will ought always to elect that which the intellect judges to be
better and more agreeable, since it cannot reject something except be-
cause it found in it some aspect of bad or of lesser good.
Their argument seems to be that the freedom of the will ought to be
within the latitude of its object, which is the good.
But that way has a difﬁculty, for if this is true, the will is not more
free than the intellect. For just as the intellect necessarily assents to the
true, so also the will loves the good to which no bad is communicated.
And just as the will can fail to love the good because it ﬁnds an aspect
of bad, so also the intellect can fail to assent if the true does not appear
certain but is mixed with falsity in a certain way.
Furthermore, it follows that, absolutely speaking, the will is not
free, for it always follows the judgement of the intellect and must elect
what the intellect judges to be better. But the intellect is not free. Therefore,
neither is the will free.
Furthermore, this opinion is soaked in the opinion of Durandus,
which almost all theologians disprove, namely, that freedom is formally
in the intellect. For insofar as freedom in the will arises from the indifference
and freedom of the intellect’s judgement, freedom will be prior
andmoreperfectintheintellect.
Another way of speaking is that the freedom of the will arises from
the intellect, yet not from its indifference but from its perfection and
universality. For the intellect surpasses the other sensitive powers in this,
namely, that it not just cognizes confusedly that this thing is agreeable,
but that it distinctly perceives the aspect of agreeability, by separating
it from all the other aspects with which it is conjoined and considering
it insofar as it is desirable. And from this perfection of cognition arises
the perfection in the desire of the will. For just as the intellect perceives
in each thing how much goodness or badness it has, so the will can love
it according to the goodness examined in it. And for this reason those
things which appear good are not loved necessarily but freely. And all
the particular things which occur in this life are of this sort. For partic-
ular things are never apprehended as necessary [goods], either because
happiness is not placed in that in which it should be placed, because it is
not actually considered, or, at least, because numerically these acts and
this object are not deemed necessary.  From here, therefore, arises the
freedom of the will. And therefore whatever particular good is proposed
to the will, it can love the good for the sake of the goodness that it has
and it can fail to love it because it is not deemed necessary for happiness,
at least here and now.
But it should be responded that it is one thing [not] to love and
another to pursue hatred.30 Not to love implies freedom with respect to
exercise. And it is not necessary to ﬁnd an aspect of bad in the object
for this; rather, it is sufﬁcient not to ﬁnd a necessary aspect of good.31
But for hatred it is necessary to ﬁnd some aspect of bad. And the ﬁrst
view — which should be explained rather than wholly repudiated — points
in this direction.

11. From all of this, an apriori argument for the conclusion: for the
will follows the rational and discursive power. Therefore it is free. The
conclusion holds because free will follows on the intellect and reason, for,
as is proven from what was said, the intellect apprehends the aspects of
good and bad and of each thing it judges by what aspect and way it is
desirable and good. Therefore, appetite, which follows such cognition,
will be able to love each cognized good by that aspect and way by which
it is desirable and therefore [it will be able to love] freely.
It is conﬁrmed: for desire follows cognition. Therefore, an appeti-
tive power in the highest grade follows the cognoscitive power existing
in the highest grade, and, therefore, freely. But the intellect is such a
power among the cognoscitive powers; therefore, the will among appetitive
powers.

12. Whether the will and free will are really distinguished. From which
it is also proven that the will and freewill are the same in thing and na-
ture. They are distinguished just like intellect and reason. For just as
intellect is called intellect ﬁrst and absolutely, insofar as it understands
or insofar as it understands (intuetur) a thing, strictly speaking, but is
called reason insofar as it reasons discursively, so also the will is called
such either insofar as it wills or insofar as it tends in a simple way to the
end, but is called freewill insofar as it turns to means by free election.

13. In which acts or concerning which objects the will is free. But
concerning this conclusion we still need to explain in which acts and
concerning which objects the will is free. But this cannot be explained
without discussing multiple theological questions at the same time. And
for that reason I say brieﬂy that willing with respect to exercise is one
thing (it consists in being able to have an act and to cease from that act)
and willing with respect to speciﬁcation is another (it consists in being
able to have this act or its contrary, either love or hatred, or in being able
to love either this thing or its opposite).
I say, therefore, that the will is determined with respect to speci-
ﬁcation to the good and happiness in general, but not with respect to
exercise.
The ﬁrst part is proven: for no aspect of bad appears in happiness
or in the good in general so that the will could pursue hatred of it.
Thesecondpartisproven: for a love of this good or of happiness is
never offered in this life as strictly speaking necessary and therefore the
will is not necessitated to exercising it. On the other hand, the will is
not necessitated to any particular good in this life, neither with respect
to exercise (because one does not plainly and clearly see a complete and
necessary aspect of good in it) nor with respect to speciﬁcation (because
there is no good in this life which is not mixed up with bads and difﬁculties).
Hence, the will differs in this respect from the intellect, for the
intellect is not free in itself with respect to exercise, but depends on the
motion of the will, as was shown above.32 But with respect to speciﬁcation,
if the object appears evidently true, the intellect is necessitated to
assenting. But the will is not necessitated to loving something even if it
appears evidently good. This is because the aspect of truth is only one
in kind and so, if a thing has truth, all falsity is excluded. On the other
hand, the aspect of goodness is not only one and so one goodness can
be mixed up with other aspect of bad. After this life, however, if a hu-
manbeing attains the vision of God, it will be necessitated to a love for
Godbothwithrespect to exercise and with respect to speciﬁcation. For
there no aspect of bad can be found, but always the most supreme and
necessary aspect of good. But in all other acts the will is free, as much in
election as in intention for the end, although in different ways. For con-
cerning means it acts not only freely but with deliberation and counsel.
But concerning the end it acts without deliberation. But about all these
things one should talk about ST IaIIae, some of q. 1 and some of qq. 9,
10, and 13.

14. Response to the ﬁrst and second arguments. From here the so-
lution to the ﬁrst and second arguments is proven. I respond that the
same power which operates freely concerning some objects can operate
naturally and necessarily concerning other objects. This is because it is a
higher power and operates according to the exigency of the objects, just
as the will of God necessarily loves his essence because that object is wor-
thy of being loved that way but loves creatures freely because they are
also worthy of being loved in this way. So also our will proportionately.

15. Response to the third. How God concurs with our will. The third
argument begs for a long treatise about the way in which God concurs
withourwillinexercisingacts,naturalaswellassupernatural,whilepre-
serving our will’s freedom. Many theologians speak about this matter,
whichcanbeseeninST Ia.19, 22, and 23 and IaIIae.109. Nevertheless, I
brieﬂy say, along with St. Thomas in the mentioned places as well as IaI-
Iae.10.3, that since the will is free by its nature, God, since he is inﬁnite
in wisdom and power, adjusts himself to the causes of things and concurs
with each one in that way which its nature requires. And thus he works
with the will without necessitating it but leaving it to determine itself to
what it wished and offering assistance and counsel to it.
Therefore, I respond to the argument in form, that once everything
required has been posited in the ﬁrst act, the will can issue and not issue
a second act. For God, for his part, is prepared to concur with the will
for the act which it wishes to effect. It is in my power whether God
concurs with me or does not concur. And therefore, there is freedom
in election. Hence, when it is said that once the divine will is posited,
the will cannot not act, it still carries through, nevertheless, that the will
acts freely. For that proposition has a compound sense and only posits a
conditional necessity.

16. Response to the fourth. I respond to the fourth argument that the
will, when it acts, acts freely strictly speaking. And when it does not act,
it freely does not act. For in that same instant in which it could act as
far as it is concerned it could also not act. In order to understand this
the will should be considered in that instant in which it elicits an act as
a nature prior to the act itself. And this power as such freely determines
itself to eliciting this act. And after it is already understood under the
act, it necessarily is under that act which then is, because the composite
has been made. And that is only the necessity of the consequence rather
than the necessity of the consequent, since with that the freedom stands
strictly speaking. This argument is discussed more extensively in ST
Ia.14.13 and 19.7. And in this way freedom also remains.

17. Response to the ﬁfth. [I respond to] the ﬁfth argument: for God
does not know my free acts except insofar as they are in some way present
to his eternity. And in that way he knows them to be future, as they are,
and his knowledge does not imply necessity except conditionally.

18. Response to the sixth. The sixth argument introduces another
difﬁculty: in what way the heavens have dominion over the operations
of our will. Concerning this matter, [see] ST IaIIae.9.5. But this is not
the place for discussing it in its entirety. Nevertheless, I say brieﬂy that
the heavens have an inﬂuence over the bodies of human being and over
all corporeal powers, which intrinsically in their dispositions depend on
thedispositionsofthebodies. But,ontheotherhand,theheavensdonot
directly have an inﬂuence or dominion over the acts of the intellect and
will. For these powers are spiritual and of a higher order, for although
our soul is the form of the body it, nevertheless, is not wholly immersed
in the body but is raised from the body in some of its acts. Indirectly and,
as it were, by consequence, insofar as reason follows sense and will fol-
lows appetite, the heavens, inﬂuencing these material powers, indirectly
and, as it were, by consequence, draw the will, not directly but by inclin-
ing it. Nevertheless, the will can through its freedom resist the inﬂuence
of the heavens and have dominion over it. As it is said: ‘A wise person
will have dominion over the stars’.

19. In response to the seventh argument, so that we may oppose
the impiety of Luther’s assertion that the concupiscence of the sensitive
appetite is always a mortal sin and the will is always necessitated by the
disordering of the appetite that remains after sin. But the theologians
provokethis and therefore it should be said brieﬂy that appetite and will
are two distinct powers following different cognitions. And for this rea-
son they are inclined to different things. And one draws the other after
itself not by necessitating the other power but by inclining it in some
way. Nor is it repugnant that the same soul desire contraries through
different powers, especially if it constrains the inclination of one power
through the other power. Concerning this matter, see ST IaIIae.9.2.

20. The eighth argument raises another difﬁculty, namely, whether
God necessitates or compels the will. Concerning this matter, [see] St. Thomas,
ST Ia.89.1 and IaIIae.6.4.   I answer brieﬂy—for it is a theo-
logical matter—that although the will of itself is free, it can, nevertheless,
be necessitated by God, for ‘the heart of the king is in the hand of God
and he can turn it wherever he wishes’. For God is omnipotent and
has dominion over the will. Nor is what is brought up in the argument
similar. For a thing which operates necessarily is material and of a lower
order and for that reason it is incapable of freedom of itself by its own
nature. For that reason, freedom cannot be conferred on it by God, for
freedom has to be from something intrinsic. For freedom expresses a
certain intrinsic dominion over one’s own acts and for that reason it in
unintelligible that freedom be attributed to something by an extrinsic
thing. But, on the other hand, necessity is from something extrinsic and
therefore God can impose necessity on a thing that is free according to
its own nature. Nevertheless, God cannot impose violence on the will.
For violence express what is contrary to the will and inclination. But the
will cannot will something contrary to its own willing, for by the fact
that it wills, it already has a willing and inclination to that. And for that
reason compulsion in the will implies a contradiction. But there is more
to be said about these matters in their places.
